## Common Programming Concepts

This chapter covers concepts that appear in almost every programming language and how they work in Rust. Many programming languages have much in common at their core. None of the concepts presented in this chapter are unique to Rust, but we'll discuss them in the context of Rust and explain the conventions arouund using these concepts.

Specifically, you'll learn about variables, basic types, functions, comments, and control flow. These foundations will be in every Rust program, and learning them early will give you a strong core to start from.

> **Keywords**
>
> The Rust language has a set of *keywords* that are reserved for use by the language only, much as in other languages. Keep in mind that you cannot use these words as names of variables or functions. Most of the keywords have special meanings, and you'll be using them to do various tasks in your Rust programs; a few have no current functionality associated with them but have been reserved for funcitonality that might be added to Rust in the future. You can find a list of. The keywords in Appendix A.

#### Avriables and Mutability

As metioned in Chapter 2, by default variables are immutable. This is one of many nudges Rust gives you to write your code in a way. that takes advantage of the safety and. easy concurrency that Rust offers. However,  you still have the option to make your variables mutable. Let's explore how and why Rust encourages you to favor immutability and why sometimes you might want to. opt out.

When a variable is immutable, once a value is bound to a name, you can't change that value. To illustrate this, let's generate a new project called *variables*. In your *projects* dictionary by using `cargo new variables`.

Then, in your new *variables* dictionary, open *src/main.rs* and replace its code with following code that won't compel just yet:

Filename: src/main.rs

```rust
fn main() {
  let x = 5;
  println!("The value of x is: {}", x);
  x = 6;
  println!("The value of x is: {}", x);
}
```

Save and run the program using `cargo run`. You should receive an error message, as shown in this output:

```bash
error[E0384]: cannot assign twice to immutable variable `x`
 --> src/main.rs:4:5
  |
2 |     let x = 5;
  |         - first assignment to `x`
3 |     println!("The value of x is: {}", x);
4 |     x = 6;
  |     ^^^^^ cannot assign twice to immutable variable
```

 This example shows how the compiler helps you find errors in your programs. Even thougn compiler errors can be frustrating, they  only mean. your program isn't safely doing what you want it to do yet; they do not mean that you're not a good programmer! Experienced Rustaceans still get compiler errors.

