## Using Structs to Structure Releted Data

A *struct*, or *structure*, is a custom data type that lets you name and package together multiple related values that make up a meaningful group. If you're familiar with an object-oriented language, a *struct* is like an object's data attributes. In this chapter, we'll compare and contrast tuples with structs, demonstrate how to use structs, and discuss how to define methods and associated functions to specify behavior associated with a struct's data. Structs and enums (discussed in Chapter 6) are the building blocks for creating new types in your program's domain to take full advantage of Rust's compile time type checking.

### Defining and Instrantiating Structs

Structs are similar to tuples, which were discussed in Chapter 3. Like tuples, the pieces of a struct can be different types. Unlike with tuples, you'll name each piece of data so it's clear what the values mean. As a result of these names, structs are more flexible than tuples: you don't have to rely on the order of the data to specify or access the values of an instance.

To define a struct, we enter the keyword `struct` and name the entire struct. A struct's name should describe the significance of the pieces of data being grouped together. Then, inside curly brackets, we define the names and types of the pieces of data, which we call *fields*. For example, Listing 5-1 shows a struct that stores information about a user account.

```rust
struct User {
	username: String,
	email: String,
	sign_in_count: u64,
  active: bool,
}
```

###### Listing 5-1: A `User` struct definition

To use a struct after we've defined it, we create an *instance* of that struct by specifying concrete values for each of the fields. We create an instance by stating the name of the struct and then add curly brackets containing `key: value` pairs, where the keys are the name of the fields and the values are the data we want to store in those fields. We don't have to specify the fields in the same order in which we declared them in the struct. In other words, the struct definition is like a general template for the type, and instances fill in that template with particular data to create values of the type. For example, we can declare a particular user as shown in Listing 5-2.

```rust
let user1 = User {
  email: String::from("someone@example.com"),
  username: String::from("someusername123"),
  active: true,
  sign_in_count: 1,
};
```

###### Listing 5-2: Creating an instance of the `User` struct

To get a specific value from a struct, we can use doc notation. If we wanted just this user's email address, we could use `user1.email` wherever we wanted to use this value. If the instance is mutable, we can change a value by using the doc notation and assigning into a particular field. Listing 5-3 shows how to change the value in the `email` field of a mutable `User` instance.

```rust
let mut user1 = User {
  email: String::from("someone@example.com"),
  username: String::from("someusername123"),
  active: true,
  sign_in_count: 1,
};

user1.email = String::from("anotheremail@example.com");
```

###### Listing 5-3: Changing the value in the `email` field of a `User` instance

Note that the entire instance must be mutable; Rust doesn't allow us to mark only certain fields as mutable. As with any expression, we can construct a new instance of the struct as the last expression in the function body to implicitly return that new instance.

Listing 5-4 shows a `build_user` function that returns a `User` instance with the given email and username. The `active` field gets the value of `true`, and the `sign_in_count` gets a value of `1`.

```rust
fn build_user(email: String, username: String) -> User {
  User{
    email: email,
    username: username,
    active: true,
    sign_in_count: 1,
  }
}
```

###### Listing 5-4: A `build_user` function that takes an email and username and return a `User` instance

It make sense to name the function parameters with the same name as the struct fields, but having to repeat the `email` and `username` field names and variables is a bit tedious. If the struct had more fields, repeating each name would get even more annoying. Luckily, there's a convenient shorthand!

#### Using the Field Init Shothand when Variables and Fields Have the Same Name

Because the parameter names and the struct field names are exactly the same in Listing 5-4, we can use the *field init shorthand* syntax to rewrite `build_user` so that it behaves exactly the same but doesn't have the repetition of `email` and `username`, as shown in Listing 5-5.

```rust
fn build_user(email: String, username: String) -> User {
  User {
    email,
    username,
    active: true,
    sign_in_count: 1,
  }
}
```

###### Listing 5-5: A `build_user` function that uses field init shorthand because the `email` and `username` parameters have the same name as struct fields

Here, we're creating a new instance of the `User` struct, which has a field named `email`. We want to set the `email` field's value to the value in the `email` parameter of the `build_user` function. Because the `email` field and the `email` parameter have the same name, we only need to write `email` rather than `email: email`.

#### Creating instances From Other Instances With Struct Update Syntax

It's often useful to create a new instance of a struct that uses most of an old instance's values but changes some. You'll do this using *struct update syntax*.

First, Listing 5-6 shows how we create a new `User` instance in `user2` without the update syntax. We set new values for `email` and `username` but otherwise use the same values from `user1` that we created in Listing 5-2.

```rust
let user2 = User {
  email: String::from("another@example.com"),
  username: String::from("anotherusername567"),
  active: user1.active,
  sign_in_count: user1.sign_in_count,
}
```

###### Listing 5-6: Creating a new `User` instance using some of the values from `user1`

Using struct update syntax, we can achieve the same effect with less code, as shown in Listing 5-7. The syntax `..` specifies that the remaining fields not explicitly set should have the same value as the fields in the given instance.

```rust
let user2 = User {
  email: String::from("another@example.com"),
  username: String::from("anotherusername567"),
  ..user1
}
```

###### Listing 5-7: Using struct update syntax to set new `email` and `username` values for a `User` instance but use the rest of the values from the fields of the instance in the `user1` variable

The code in Listing 5-7 also creates an instance in `user2` that has a different value for `email` and `username` but has the same values for the `active` and `sign_in_count` fields from `user1`.

#### Using Tuple Structs without Named Fields to Create Different Types

You can also define structs that look similar to tuples, called *tuple structs*. Tuple structs have the added meaning the struct name provides but don't have names associated with their fields; rather, they just have the types of the fields. Tuple structs are useful when you want to give the whole tuple a name and make the tuple be a different type from other tuples, and naming each field as in a regular struct would be verbose or redundant.

To define a tuple struct, start with the `struct` keyword and the struct name followed by the types in the tuple, For example, here are definitions and usages of two tuple structs named `Color` and `Point`:

```rust
struct Color(i32, i32, i32);
struct Point(i32, i32, i32);

let black = Color(0, 0, 0);
let origin = Point(0, 0, 0);
```

Note that the `black` and `origin` values are different types, because they're instances of different tuple structs. Each struct you define is its own type, even though the fields within the struct have the same types. For example, a function that takes a parameter of type `Color` cannot take a `Point` as an argument, even though both types are made up of three `i32` values. Otherwise, tuple struct instances behave like tuples: you can restructure them into their individual pieces, you can use a `.` Followed by the index to access an individual value, and so on.

#### Unit-Like Structs Without Any Fields

You can also define structs that don't have any fields! These are called *unit-like structs* because they behave similarly to `()`, the unit type. Unit-like structs can be useful in situations in which you need to implement a trait on some type but don't have any data that you want to store in the type itself. We'll discuss traits in Chapter 10.

> 
>
> ##### Ownership of Struct Data
>
> In the `User` struct definition in Listing 5-1, we used the owned `String` type rather than the `&str` string slice type. This is a deliberate choice because we want instances of this struct to own alll of its data and for that data to be valid for as long as tge entire struct is valid.
>
> It's possible for structs to store references to data owned by something else, but to do so requires the use of *lifetimes*, a Rust feature that we'll discuss in Chapter 10. Lifetimes ensure that the data referenced by a struct is valid for as long as the struct is. Let's say you try to store a reference in a struct without specifying lifetimes, like this, which won't work:
>
> Filename: src/main.rs
>
> ```rust
> struct User {
>   username: &str,
>   email: &str,
>   sign_in_count: u64,
>   active: bool,
> }
> 
> fn main() {
>   let user1 = User {
>     email: "someone@example.com",
>         username: "someusername123",
>         active: true,
>         sign_in_count: 1,
>   };
> }
> ```
>
> The compiler will complain that it needs lifetime specifiers:
>
> ```bash
> error[E0106]: missing lifetime specifier
>  -->
>   |
> 2 |     username: &str,
>   |               ^ expected lifetime parameter
> 
> error[E0106]: missing lifetime specifier
>  -->
>   |
> 3 |     email: &str,
>   |            ^ expected lifetime parameter
> ```
>
> In Chapter 10, we'll discuss how to fix these errors so you can store references in structs, but for now, we'll fix errors like these using owned types like `String` instead of references like `&str`.

### An Example Program Using Structs

To understand when we might want to use structs, let's write a program that calculates the area of a rectangle. We'll start with single variables, and then refactor the program until we're using structs instead.

Let's make a new binary project with Cargo called *rectangles* that will take the width and height of a rectangle specified in pixels and calculate the area of the rectangle. Listing 5-8 shows a short program with one way of doing exactly that in our project's *src/main.rs*.

Filename: src/main.rs

```rust
fn main() {
  let width1 = 30;
  let height1 = 50;
  println!(
    "The area of the rectangle is {} square pixels.",
    area(width1, height1)
  );
}

fn area(width: u32, height: u32) -> u32 {
  width*height
}
```

###### Listing 5-8: Calculating the area of a rectangle specified by separate width and height variables

Now, run this program using `cargo run`:

```bash
The area of the rectangle is 1500 square pixels.
```

Even though Listing 5-8 works and figures out the area of the rectangle by calling the `area` function with each dimension, we can do better. The width and the height are related to each other because together they describe one rectangle.

The issue with this code is evident in the signature of `area`:

```rust
fn area(width: u32, height: u32) -> u32 {}
```

The `area` function is supposed to calculate the area of one rectangle, but the function we wrote has two parameters. The parameters are related, but that's not expressed anywhere in our program. It would be more readable and more manageable to group width and height together. We've already discussed one way we might do that in ["The Tuole Type"]() section of Chapter 3: by using tuples.

#### Refactoring with Tuples

Listing 5-9 shows another version of our program that uses tuples.

Filename: src/main.rs

```rust
fn main() {
  let rect1 = (30,50);
  println!(
    "The area of the rectangle is {} square pixels.",
    area(rect1)
  );
}

fn area(dimensions: (u32, u32)) -> u32 {
  dimensions.0*dimensions.1
}
```

###### Listing 5-9: Specifying the width and height of the rectangle with a tuple

In one way, this program is better. Tuples let us add a bit of structure, and we're now passing just one argument. But in another way, this version is less clear: tuples don't name their elements, so our calculation has become more confusing because we have to index into the parts of the tuple.

It doesn't matter if we mix up width and height for the area calculation, but if we want to draw the rectangle on the screen, it would matter! We would have to keep in mind that `width` is the tuple index `0` and `height` is the tuple index `1`. If someone else worked on this code, they would have to figure this out and keep it in mind as well. It would be easy to forget or mix up these values and cause errors, because we haven't conveyed the meaning of our data in our code.

#### Refacting with Structs: Adding More Meaning

We use structs to add meaning by labeling the data. We can transform the tuple we're using into a data type with a name for the whole as well as names for the parts, as shown in Listing 5-10.

Filename: src/main.rs

```rust
struct Rectangle {
  width: u32,
  height: u32,
}

fn main() {
  let rect1 = Rectangle{ width:30, height: 50};
  println!(
    "The area of the rectangle is {} square pixels.",
    area(&rect1)
  );
}

fn area( rectangle: &Rectangle) -> u32 {
  rectangle.width * rectangle.height
}
```

###### Listing 5-10: Defining a `Rectangle` struct

Here we've defined a struct and named it `Rectangle`. Inside the curly brackets, we defined the fields as `width` and `height`, both of which have type `u32`. Then in `main`, we created a particular instance of `Rectangle` that has a width of 30 and a height of 50.

Our area function is now defined with one parameter. Which we've named `rectangle`, whose type is an immutable borrow of a struct `Rectangle` instance. As mentioned in Chapter 4, we want to borrow the struct rather than take ownership of it. This way. `main` retains its ownership and can continue using `rect1`, which is the reason we use the `&` in the function signature and where we call the function.

The `area` function accesses the `width` and `height` fields of the `Rectangle`, using function signature for `rect1`, which is the reason we use the `&` in the function signature and where we call the function.

The `area` function accesses the `width` and `height` fields of the `Rectangle`, using its `width` and `height` fields. The conveys that the width and height are related to each other, and it gives descriptive names to the values rather than using the tuple index value of `0` and `1`. This is a win for clarity.

#### Adding Useful Fuctionality with Derived Traits

It'd be nice to be able to print an instance of `Rectangle` while we're debugging our program and see the values for all its fields. Listing 5-11 tries using the `println!` macro as we have used in previous chapters. This won't work, however.

Filename: src/main.rs

```rust
struct Rectangle {
  width: u32,
  height: u32,
}

fn main() {
  let rect1 = Rectangle{ width: 30, height: 50 };
  println!("rect1 is {}", rect1);
}
```

###### Listing 5-11: Attempting to print a `Rectangle` instance

When we compile this code, we get an error with this core message:

```bash
error[E0277]: `Rectangle` doesn't implement `std::fmt::Display`
```

The `println!` Macro can do many kinds of formatting, and by default, the curly brackets tell `println!` to use formatting known as `Desplay`: output intended for direct end user consumption. The primitive types we've seen so far implement `Display` by default, because there's only one way you'd want to show a `1` or any other primitive type to a user. But with structs, the way `println!` Should format the output is less clear because there are more display possibilities: Do you want commas or not? Do you want to print the curly brackets? Should all the fields be shown? Due to this ambiguity Rest doesn't try to guess what we want, and structs don't have a provided implementation of `Display`.

If we continue reading the errors, we'll find this helpful note:

```bash
= help: the trait `std::fmt::Display` is not implemented for `Rectangle`
= note: in format strings you may be able to use `{:?}` (or {:#?} for pretty-print) instead
```

Let's try it! The `println!` macro call will now look like `println!("react1 is {:?}", rect1);`. Putting the specifier `:?` inside the curly brackers tells `println!` we want to use an output format called `Debug`. The `Debug` trait enables us to print our struct in a way that is usefule for developers so we can see its value while we're debugging our code.

Compile the code with this change. Drat! We still get an error:

```bash
error[E0277]: `Rectangle` doesn't implement `std::fmt::Debug`
```

But again, the compiler gives us a helpful note:

```bash
= help: the trait `std::fmt::Debug` is not implemented for `Rectangle`
= note: add `#[derive(Debug)]` or manually implement `std::fmt::Debug`
```

Rust *does* include functionality to print out debugging information, but we have to explicitly opt in to make that functionality available for our struct. To do that, we add the annotation `#[derive(Debug)]` just before the struct definition, as shown in Listing 5-12.

Filename: src/main.rs

```rust
#[derive(Debug)]
struct Rectangle {
  width: u32,
  height: u32,
}

fn main() {
  let rect1 = Rectangle { width: 30, height: 50 };
  
  println!("rect1 is {:?}",rect1);
}
```

###### Listing 5-12: Adding the annotation to derive the `Debug` trait and printing the `Rectangle` instance using debug formatting,

Now when we run the program, we won't get any errors, and we'll see the following output:

```bash
rect1 is Rectangle { width :30, height:50 }
```

Nice! It's not the prettiest output, but it shows the values of all the fields for this instance, which would definitely help during debugging. When we have larger structs, it's useful to have output that's a bit easier to read; in those case, we can use `{:#?}` instead of `{:?}` in the `println!` string. When we use the `{:#?"}` style in the example, the output will look like this:

```bash
rect1 is Rectangle {
    width: 30,
    height: 50
}
```

Rust has provided a number of traits for us to use with the `derive` annotation that can add useful behavior to our custom types. Those traits and their behaviors are listed in Appendix C. We'll cover how to implement these traits with custom behavior as well as how to create your own traits in Chapter 10.

Our `area` function is very specific: it only computes the area of rectangles. It would be helpful to tie this behavior more closely to our `Rectanle` struct, because it won't work with any other type. Let's look at how we can continue to refactor this code by turning the `area` function into an `area` *method* defined on our `Rectangle` type.

### Method Syntax

*Methods* are similar to functions: they're declared with the `fn` keyword and their name, they can have parameters and a return value, and they contain some code that is run when they're called from somewhere else. However, methods are different from functions in that they're defined within respectively), and their first parameter is always `self`, which represents the instance of the struct the method is being called on.

#### Defining Methods

Let's change the `area` function that has a `Rectangle` instance as a parameter and instead make an `area` method defined on the `Rectangle` struct, as shown in Listing 5-13.

Filename: src/main.rs

```rust
#[derive(Debug)]
struct Rectangle {
  width: u32,
  height: u32,
}

impl Rectangle {
  fn area(&self) -> u32 {
    self.width*self.height
  }
}

fn main() {
  let rect1 = Rectangle { width: 30, height: 50 };
  
  println!(
    "The area of the rectangle is {} square pixels.",
    rect1.area()
  );
  
}
```

###### Listing 5-13: Defining an `area` method on the `Rectangle` struct

To define the function within the context of `Rectangle`, we start an `impl` (implementation) block. Then we move the `area` function within the `impl` curly brackets and change the first (and in this case, only) parameter to be `self` in the signature and everywhere within the body. In `main`, where we called the `area` function and passed `rect1` as an argument, we can instead use *method syntax* to call the `area` method on our `Rectangle` instance. The method syntax goes after an instance: we add a dot followed by the method name, parentheses, and any arguments.

In the signature for `area`, we use `&self` instead of `rectangle: &Rectangle` because Rust knows the type of `self` is `Rectangle` due to this method's being inside the `impl Rectangle` context. Note that we still need to use the `&` before `self`, just as we did in `&Rectangle`. Methods can take ownership of `self`, borrow `self` immutably as we've done here, or borrow `self` mutably, just as they can any other parameter.

We've chosen `&self` here for the same reason we used `&Rectangle` in the function version: we don't want to take ownership, and we just want to read the data in the struct, not write to it. If we wanted to change the instance that we've called the method on as part of what the method does, we'd use `&mut self` as the first parameter. Having a method on as part of what the method does, by using just `self` as the first parameter is rare; this technique is usually used when the method transforms `self` into something else and you want to prevent the caller from using the original instance after the transformation.

The main benefit of using methods instead of functions, in addition to using method syntax and not having to repeat the type of `self` in every method's signature, is for organization. We've put all the things we can do with an instance of a type in one `impl` block rather than making future users of our code search for capabilities of `Rectangle` in various places in the library we provide.

> 
>
> ##### Where's the -> Operator?
>
> In C and C++, two different operators are used for calling methods: you use `.` if you're calling a method on the object directly and `->` if you're calling the method on a pointer to the object and need to dereference the pointer first. In other words, if `object` is a pointer, `object->something()` is similar to `(*object).something()`.
>
> Rust doesn't have an equivalent to the `->` operator; instead, Rust has a feature called *automatic referencing and dereferencing*. Calling methods is one of the few places in Rust that has this behavior.
>
> Here's how it works: when you call a method with `object.something()`, Rust automatically adds in `&`, `&mut`, or `*` so `object` matches the signature of the method. In other words, the following are the same:
>
> ```rust
> p1.distance(&p2)
> (&p1).distance(&p2);
> ```
>
> 
>
> 



